# Background

White matter signal abnormalities (WMSA) on human brain MRI are a common finding in normal aging, but are also indicative of diseases of aging such as Alzheimer’s disease and of cerebrovascular disease. In addition, they are one of the hallmark neuroimaging findings in multiple sclerosis (MS). In clinical assessment, the size and distribution of these lesions are described qualitatively or semi-quantitatively using visual rating scales. These scales provide meaningful information, but quantitative neuroimaging techniques allow for the extraction of much more in-depth aspects of WMSA such as their exact size, spatial distribution, and measures of damage that are continuous in nature rather than binary. 

The tools provided in this package allow for this in-depth assessment with a variety of different input options to allow flexibility for researchers using different imaging protocols. The majority of this tool’s validation was done using data from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset which includes T1w, T2w, and PDw imaging data acquired on several different MRI platforms at 1.5T field strength. Subjects in this dataset include cognitively normal older adults, older adults with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and older adults with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Significant age-related and diagnosis-related clinical results were demonstrated using both the binary segmentation of WMSA as well as measure of continuous damage that are provided in the `wmsa_continuous.mgz` output file. 

The creation of a tool that is capable of labeling damage in a continuous fashion rather than binary segmentation of ‘lesion’ vs. ‘healthy’ tissue comes from work by many others who have noticed that the subtle signal properties of white matter as seen on MRI may in fact be predictive of future damage, specifically in the penumbra regions surrounding tissue that is definitively damaged. (CITE MALLAIRD AND OTHERS HERE). In order to create such a tool, we have implemented the Mahalanobis distance (MD) to assign a quantitative ‘damage’ value to each voxel in the white matter. The formula for the MD is as follows: 

<<insert MD formula here>>  

It is important to note that the outputs of this tool will depend on the inputs to the tool, most significantly when interpreting measures of continuous damage using the MD metric. Within a single study that implements a standard imaging protocol, MD values may be compared within and across subjects. This value, however, is a relative value and therefore should not be compared across studies that implement different imaging protocols. 
